CICS is an app server and transaction monitor 
that allows an app to be accessed 
interactively from a terminal 
or browser connected to an IBM mainframe.

The tesources that CICS needs for 
this is collectively called the
CICS region.

Each interaction through CICS 
is called a transaction, and is
facilitated through a CICS task which 
can invoke multiple programs, 
typically written in COBOL.

Design of a CICS terminal screen is done using a 
facility called BMS (basic mapping support) 
and involves creating a map of 
the terminal screen in which 
are places the various artifacts such as IO fields needed 
for the transaction.

Developers coming from a VMS background may 
equate a CICS task with ACMS, and BMS with 
DECFORMS which achieve a similar 
result. Although DECFORMS being procedural may arguably achieve the
status of a task.

To get started, the following steps are required.
1) Define and boot up a CICS region.
Typically via JCL jobs.
2) Get your APPLID from the log files labelled DFH115.
3) Log onto the CICS region from the
typical ZOS logon screen by specifying APPLID=applid
4) use the following CICS commands
    CESN to log in (if not already on)
    SESF to log off
    CEDA to manage resources including
         tasks, programs, files, terminals
    CEMT to manage the CICS region.
5) run your transaction.

Transactions in CICS are identified by a four character code defined in CEDA.
CEDA is also used to identify which programs the task needs and which PDS library holds then.
Files must also be declared as well as terminals.

Because CICS knows what files (datasets) are involved in a transaction they can be rilled back as well as the database if a program abends.

Programs need to be written with EXEC CICS 
statements and so must be precimpuled before
compilation. If DB2 is used by 
the program them the program must 
also be precompiled for DB2 as well.
Note that because these programs may resude 
in storage and run by multiple 
users they must be compiled with the 
RENT (re-entrant) parameter.
